---
title: "My Computer Science education"
categories:
  - Work
tags:
  - university
  - computer
  - science
---

I am a junior (third year student) at the Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani (BITS Pilani) in India. I am majoring in Computer Science. In this post, I shall attempt to describe my work as a student at this lovely institute. This is intended for two extreme classes of readers. The first, who are reading this to evaluate me as a candidate for some position and want to know more about me. The second, a freshman/sophomore starting out his/her journey and possibly seeking advice (which, I would [Pun] advise [End Of Pun] against!). 

# The freshman year

As a freshman, I have to admit that I was clueless about my major and had taken it only because I could (and many others who wanted it, couldn't; which made it seem valuable). However, I did spend some of the first semester of my freshman year learning the C language and studying some basic data structures and algorithms (watched MIT OCW 6.006 and 6.042). I must say that most of this was not a part of my prescribed curriculum. This obviously continued well into the second semester when I also started programming for sport on online judges like SPOJ and codeforceas. I wasn't very good at it. I was motivated by the fact that this skill set is what most companies hire on. I did gain some proficiency but the enthusiasm died down in about a year due to reasons I shall now explain.

This was the year I would learn about a really great student initiative at BITS, [Team Anant](http://www.team-anant.org). This group of 10 or so undergraduates were planning to build and launch a nanosatellite 700 kilometres above the surface! I spent my winter studying as much as I could and applied. I got in. Initially all of us were asked to read more about nanosatellite missions that had done well, and some others that hadn't. Soon enough, I was asked to work specifically on the on-board computer for the nanosatellite.

My initial work was mostly about understanding multiprogramming in general. Parallel computation as a concept was very interesting and some initial (disastrous) experiments with it were very intriguing. I read a lot about the POSIX library in linux for multithreading. It was exciting to know that this was two years ahead of my curriculum! It was also very important to understand the concepts of synchronization, and have an overview of the sort of primitives required therein. This included mutexes, semaphores, condition variables, barriers and a brief overview of message passing using queues. All of this was pertaining to the POSIX standard. I did write some hello world programs in this domain, such as a simple producer consumer multithreaded model on a shared data. This would require me to spend many hours debugging non-reproducable errors.

# The summer and the sophomore year

My sophomore year was fairly hectic but very enjoyable. I had alread spent a part of the summer reading about Operating Systems for the team. I consulted the very lucid text "Operating systems: Three easy pieces". It gave me a good understanding of the concepts of virtualization, memory management, segmentation, address spaces, paging, caching, TLBs, co-operative vs pre-emptive multiprogramming, various scheduling policies and finally about concurrency. It was fascinating to read about hardware instructions for lock-free synchronization. In the summer, I also implemented a thread safe memory pool and tested it using the prebuilt producer consumer model, which was very rewarding.

As the semester started, I met with the members working on the on-board computer and we had extremely long and detailed discussions about the software architecture. Many of the concepts I read about, along with some others, regarding the satellite specific requirements came in handy when we developed a novel architecture for our own mission. I started working on the implementation soon after. By the end of the first semester, we had a multiprocessing based system with POSIX signals being used for inter process communication (had to read about signals as well...).

In the winter, I stayed back along with some of the team members to build software modules for interfacing with the peripherals that we had just bought (this was the year when the university gave us our first budget of 300,000 indian rupees, which enabled us to buy stuff).

As the second semester started, I took on one more co-curricular project which was a (more in-depth) continuation of my work in parallel computing. I was working one-on-one with one of the best professors in the computer science department. The objective was to study, implement and analyze shared memory data structures. We started off with the text, "The art of multiprocessor programming, by Herlihy and Shavit". It was simply fascinating to read and build locks! And specifically memory hierarchy aware locks. The project would require me to implement a hash table, binary search tree and AVL tree with fine grained synchronization (this was the hardest part).

This semester was very rewarding for me. We at Team Anant presented a paper about our software at the international technical fest of our university and won the <b> best paper award</b>. A paper detailing the entire on board computer development was also <b> accepted at the 68th International Astronautical Congress </b> (Interestingly, this post was first written while in a long flight when I was returning from Adelaide). In the mid of the second semester, I also took charge as the <b> Lead of On-board Computer development at Team Anant</b>! It was surreal to know that I was responsible for a subsystem of 10 undergraduates (out of a team of 50), and we were working for <b> a mission worth 12.5 million rupees</b>!

# The summer intern

As a part of the BITS curriculum, I interned for two months in the summer. I was sent to Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala to work with UST Global. All in all, it the perfect internship. I worked on <I> A decentralised firewall using deep learning and blockchain technology </I>. When I was given the project, I did not know what any of those words meant. We were a team of four guys, and by the end of two months, I along with my team had built a deep belief network for malware detection and a decentralised firewall system using the Ethereum blockchain network. Our project was <b> highly appreciated by Mr. Manoj Abraham, the Inspector General and director of the cyberdome, Kerala Police </b>. In fact, it lead to <b>a collaboration for future projects between UST and Cyberdome</b>. In a very fast paced environment, I had to learn the math behind the generative model we used, do a literature review of malware detection techniques, and finally implement and test a deep belief network using Tensorflow (had to read about that as well). The blockchain part was handled by two of my team mates. This opened up a new area of interest for me, one which I still know nothing about. Artificial Intelligence. I do plan to work more in this area.


# Since the third year is in progress, I would rather write about it later.

